design.md, before:

# RAG System Design Report (Enhanced)

## System Overview
This document describes the enhanced Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system for answering complex questions about Apple and Tesla's SEC 10-K filings, featuring advanced chunking, SEC item extraction, hybrid reranking, and keyword filtering.

## Architecture Components

### 1. Document Ingestion & Chunking Strategy

**Chunking Approach: Optimized Sliding Window with SEC Intelligence**
- **Chunk Size**: 700 characters with 150-character overlap
- **Rationale**: 
  - 700 characters (~140-175 words) provides optimal balance:
    - More focused context than 1000-char chunks (reduces noise)
    - Sufficient semantic coherence for financial statements
    - Better granularity for precise source attribution
  - 150-character overlap (21% overlap) ensures:
    - Critical information at boundaries is captured
    - Continuity across sequential chunks
    - Reduced context fragmentation for multi-sentence concepts

**SEC Document Intelligence**:
- **Automatic Item Detection**: Extracts SEC filing structure
  - Pattern matching: `ITEM \d+[A-Z]?\.?\s*(.+)`
  - Captures: Item 1 (Business), Item 8 (Financial Statements), etc.
  - Stores item number and title in chunk metadata
- **Benefits**:
  - Enables item-specific retrieval ("What's in Item 1A?")
  - Improves source citations with section context
  - Helps LLM understand document structure

**Hierarchical Chunk IDs**:
- **Format**: `{document_name}|p{page_num}|c{sequence}`
- **Example**: `Apple 10-K|p282|c0`
- **Advantages**:
  - Traceable provenance for every chunk
  - Supports efficient document filtering
  - Enables page-level aggregation for citations

**Metadata Preservation**:
- Each chunk stores: 
  - Document name, page number, character position
  - SEC item number and title (if applicable)
  - Chunk ID with hierarchical structure
- Enables precise source citation and SEC section referencing
- Supports document filtering for multi-document retrieval

**PDF Processing**:
- Uses `pdfplumber` for robust text extraction
- Preserves page structure and maintains text order
- Filters out small chunks (<50 characters) to avoid noise

---

### 2. Embedding & Vector Storage

**Embedding Model**: Sentence-Transformers (`all-MiniLM-L6-v2`)
- **Why this model**:
  - Lightweight (22M parameters) - fast inference, low memory
  - Pre-trained on 215M+ sentence pairs
  - Excellent semantic understanding for financial documents
  - High quality (MiniLM outperforms larger BERT models on STS benchmarks)
  - Achieves 81.7% average performance on semantic similarity tasks

**Vector Database**: FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search)
- **Why FAISS**:
  - Efficient similarity search (L2 distance metric)
  - In-memory indexing suitable for document sets up to millions of vectors
  - No external dependencies or database setup required
  - Supports persistence (save/load index)

---

### 3. Enhanced Retrieval Pipeline with Hybrid Re-ranking

**Three-Stage Retrieval**:

**Stage 1 - Vector Similarity Search (FAISS)**:
- Retrieve top-N candidates using FAISS L2 distance
- **Prefetch multiplier**: 6x (e.g., 60 candidates for top-10 result)
- **Rationale**: Higher prefetch improves recall before reranking
- Fast, broad retrieval across entire document corpus
- Considers semantic meaning but may include loosely relevant items

**Stage 2 - Keyword-Based Filtering**:
- **Stopword Removal** with financial domain protection:
  - Removes common English stopwords (NLTK corpus)
  - **Protects financial keywords**: revenue, profit, debt, assets, equity, etc.
  - Prevents removal of critical domain terms
- **Financial Pattern Extraction**:
  - Currency amounts: `$\d+(\.\d+)?[BMK]?`
  - Percentages: `\d+(\.\d+)?%`
  - Years/quarters: `20\d{2}`, `Q[1-4]`
  - Fiscal terms: FY, fiscal year, quarter
- **Keyword Overlap Scoring**:
  - Computes token overlap between query and chunk
  - Weights by query token frequency
  - Filters chunks below minimum similarity threshold

**Stage 3 - Hybrid Re-ranking**:
- **Model**: `cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L-12-v2` (or FlashRank equivalent)
- **Hybrid Score Calculation**:
  - **70% FlashRank/Cross-Encoder score**: Deep semantic relevance
  - **30% Keyword matching score**: Lexical overlap and pattern matching
  - Combined score = `0.7 * rerank_score + 0.3 * keyword_score`
- **Why Hybrid Approach**:
  - Cross-encoder alone misses exact keyword matches
  - Keyword matching captures specific terms and numbers
  - Combination improves precision by 15-20% over single method
- Returns top-K most relevant chunks with confidence scores

**Justification for 3-Stage Design**:
- Stage 1 (FAISS): Fast retrieval, ~82% recall with 6x prefetch
- Stage 2 (Keywords): Noise reduction, removes ~40% irrelevant chunks
- Stage 3 (Hybrid): Precision boost to ~91% with combined signals
- Total pipeline: ~89% precision@5 (vs. 75% with FAISS alone)

---

### 4. LLM Integration

**LLM Choice**: Ollama with Mistral 7B
- **Why Mistral**:
  - Instruction-tuned open-source model (no API restrictions)
  - 7B parameters: fast inference on standard hardware
  - Strong performance on factual QA tasks
  - Better context adherence than Llama 2 of similar size
  - Supports temperature control for deterministic responses

**Custom Prompting Strategy**:

1. **System Prompt**:
   - Establishes role as financial analyst
   - Defines strict adherence to provided context
   - Sets rules for source citations
   - Specifies out-of-scope handling

2. **Context Formatting**:
   ```
   [Source 1: Apple 10-K, Page 282]
   <retrieved text>
   
   [Source 2: Apple 10-K, Page 394]
   <retrieved text>
   ```
   - Clear source attribution for each chunk
   - Helps LLM trace information back to sources
   - Enables accurate citation generation

3. **Generation Parameters**:
   - Temperature: 0.3 (low, for factuality)
   - Top-p: 0.9 (nucleus sampling for diversity)
   - Top-k: 40 (reduce low-probability token noise)

---

### 5. Out-of-Scope Handling

**Scope Boundaries**:
Questions answered:
- Financial metrics from Apple and Tesla 10-K filings
- Corporate structure, risk factors, executive compensation
- Business operations and vehicle models
- Filed dates and corporate filings info

**Out-of-Scope Categories**:
1. **Future Predictions**: "What is Tesla's stock price forecast for 2025?"
   - Response: "This question cannot be answered based on the provided documents."
   
2. **Information Not in 10-K**: "What color is Tesla's headquarters?"
   - Response: "This question cannot be answered based on the provided documents."
   
3. **Current Personnel Updates**: "Who is the CFO of Apple as of 2025?"
   - Response: "This question cannot be answered based on the provided documents."
   - (Documents are from 2023-2024; future 2025 info not available)

**Detection Logic**:
- Keyword-based filtering (stock forecast, weather, painting)
- Temporal mismatch detection (2025 questions on 2024 documents)
- System prompt fallback for ambiguous cases

---

## Performance Metrics

| Component | Metric | Baseline | Enhanced | Improvement |
|-----------|--------|----------|----------|-------------|
| Chunk Size | Characters | 1000 | 700 | Better coherence |
| Chunk Overlap | Ratio | 5% (50/1000) | 21% (150/700) | More context |
| Prefetch Multiplier | Factor | 3x | 6x | +Higher recall |
| Embedding Generation | Speed | ~1000 vec/sec | ~1000 vec/sec | Same |
| FAISS Search | Time | <50ms (30 items) | <50ms (60 items) | Same |
| Keyword Filtering | Time | N/A | ~50ms | New stage |
| Re-ranking | Time | ~200ms (30 items) | ~300ms (60 items) | +100ms |
| LLM Response | Time | ~2-5 sec | ~2-5 sec | Same |
| **Total Latency** | **Per Query** | **~2-3 sec** | **~2.5-6 sec** | **+0.5-3 sec** |
| **Relevance (P@5)** | **Precision** | **~75%** | **~89%** | **+14%** |

---

## Key Enhancements Summary

### What Was Added:

1. **SEC Item Extraction** (`ingestion.py`):
   - Regex pattern matching for SEC filing structure
   - Automatic metadata enrichment with item numbers/titles
   - Better document organization and retrieval

2. **Advanced Reranker** (`advanced_reranker.py`):
   - Stopword filtering with 300+ protected financial terms
   - Financial pattern extraction (currency, %, years, quarters)
   - Keyword-based chunk filtering before reranking
   - Hybrid scoring (70% semantic + 30% keyword)

3. **Hierarchical Chunk IDs**:
   - Format: `document|page|chunk_sequence`
   - Enables precise traceability and citations
   - Supports efficient filtering and aggregation

4. **Optimized Parameters**:
   - Chunk size: 1000 → 700 chars (better granularity)
   - Overlap: 50 → 150 chars (more context preservation)
   - Prefetch: 3x → 6x multiplier (higher recall)

5. **Testing Infrastructure** (`test_improvements.py`):
   - Validation suite for all improvements
   - PDF file processing with command-line interface
   - Query testing with custom documents
   - Comprehensive output and metrics

---

## Quality Assurance

1. **Source Accuracy**: Cross-reference retrieved chunks with original PDF
2. **Citation Correctness**: Manual verification of page numbers in answers
3. **Out-of-Scope Precision**: Test on ambiguous and out-of-scope queries
4. **Factual Consistency**: Compare model outputs against ground-truth answers

---

## Deployment Considerations

1. **Cloud Compatibility**:
   - FAISS index stored as `.faiss` file (~500MB for ~10K documents)
   - Chunks metadata in `chunks.json` (~100MB)
   - All dependencies available on Kaggle/Colab

2. **Scalability**:
   - Current design supports 1M documents with FAISS
   - Can upgrade to Approximate NN search if needed
   - Multi-document retrieval already implemented

3. **Model Requirements**:
   - Ollama models require GPU (or CPU with slowdown)
   - Alternative: Hugging Face Inference API for cloud deployment

---

## Future Improvements

1. ~~**Hybrid Search**: Combine keyword + semantic search~~ ✓ Implemented
2. ~~**Advanced Chunking**: Optimize chunk size and overlap~~ ✓ Implemented  
3. **Query Expansion**: Auto-generate related questions for better retrieval
4. **Fact Verification**: LLM-based verification against retrieved text
5. **Multi-hop Reasoning**: Chain questions for complex financial analysis
6. **Fine-tuning**: Domain-specific LLM fine-tuning on SEC filings
7. **BM25 Integration**: Add sparse retrieval alongside dense vectors
8. **Adaptive Reranking**: Dynamic weight adjustment based on query type

---

## References

- Sentence-Transformers: https://www.sbert.net/
- FAISS: https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss
- Cross-Encoders: https://www.sbert.net/docs/pretrained_cross-encoders.html
- Mistral 7B: https://mistral.ai/
- Ollama: https://ollama.ai/

Commit message:

Revise LLM integration details in design.md
Updated LLM choice to 'mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2' with details on quantization and VRAM requirements. Revised model requirements to reflect Hugging Face Mistral model usage.

design.md, after:

# RAG System Design Report (Enhanced)

## System Overview
This document describes the enhanced Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system for answering complex questions about Apple and Tesla's SEC 10-K filings, featuring advanced chunking, SEC item extraction, hybrid reranking, and keyword filtering.

## Architecture Components

### 1. Document Ingestion & Chunking Strategy

**Chunking Approach: Optimized Sliding Window with SEC Intelligence**
- **Chunk Size**: 700 characters with 150-character overlap
- **Rationale**: 
  - 700 characters (~140-175 words) provides optimal balance:
    - More focused context than 1000-char chunks (reduces noise)
    - Sufficient semantic coherence for financial statements
    - Better granularity for precise source attribution
  - 150-character overlap (21% overlap) ensures:
    - Critical information at boundaries is captured
    - Continuity across sequential chunks
    - Reduced context fragmentation for multi-sentence concepts

**SEC Document Intelligence**:
- **Automatic Item Detection**: Extracts SEC filing structure
  - Pattern matching: `ITEM \d+[A-Z]?\.?\s*(.+)`
  - Captures: Item 1 (Business), Item 8 (Financial Statements), etc.
  - Stores item number and title in chunk metadata
- **Benefits**:
  - Enables item-specific retrieval ("What's in Item 1A?")
  - Improves source citations with section context
  - Helps LLM understand document structure

**Hierarchical Chunk IDs**:
- **Format**: `{document_name}|p{page_num}|c{sequence}`
- **Example**: `Apple 10-K|p282|c0`
- **Advantages**:
  - Traceable provenance for every chunk
  - Supports efficient document filtering
  - Enables page-level aggregation for citations

**Metadata Preservation**:
- Each chunk stores: 
  - Document name, page number, character position
  - SEC item number and title (if applicable)
  - Chunk ID with hierarchical structure
- Enables precise source citation and SEC section referencing
- Supports document filtering for multi-document retrieval

**PDF Processing**:
- Uses `pdfplumber` for robust text extraction
- Preserves page structure and maintains text order
- Filters out small chunks (<50 characters) to avoid noise

---

### 2. Embedding & Vector Storage

**Embedding Model**: Sentence-Transformers (`all-MiniLM-L6-v2`)
- **Why this model**:
  - Lightweight (22M parameters) - fast inference, low memory
  - Pre-trained on 215M+ sentence pairs
  - Excellent semantic understanding for financial documents
  - High quality (MiniLM outperforms larger BERT models on STS benchmarks)
  - Achieves 81.7% average performance on semantic similarity tasks

**Vector Database**: FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search)
- **Why FAISS**:
  - Efficient similarity search (L2 distance metric)
  - In-memory indexing suitable for document sets up to millions of vectors
  - No external dependencies or database setup required
  - Supports persistence (save/load index)

---

### 3. Enhanced Retrieval Pipeline with Hybrid Re-ranking

**Three-Stage Retrieval**:

**Stage 1 - Vector Similarity Search (FAISS)**:
- Retrieve top-N candidates using FAISS L2 distance
- **Prefetch multiplier**: 6x (e.g., 60 candidates for top-10 result)
- **Rationale**: Higher prefetch improves recall before reranking
- Fast, broad retrieval across entire document corpus
- Considers semantic meaning but may include loosely relevant items

**Stage 2 - Keyword-Based Filtering**:
- **Stopword Removal** with financial domain protection:
  - Removes common English stopwords (NLTK corpus)
  - **Protects financial keywords**: revenue, profit, debt, assets, equity, etc.
  - Prevents removal of critical domain terms
- **Financial Pattern Extraction**:
  - Currency amounts: `$\d+(\.\d+)?[BMK]?`
  - Percentages: `\d+(\.\d+)?%`
  - Years/quarters: `20\d{2}`, `Q[1-4]`
  - Fiscal terms: FY, fiscal year, quarter
- **Keyword Overlap Scoring**:
  - Computes token overlap between query and chunk
  - Weights by query token frequency
  - Filters chunks below minimum similarity threshold

**Stage 3 - Hybrid Re-ranking**:
- **Model**: `cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L-12-v2` (or FlashRank equivalent)
- **Hybrid Score Calculation**:
  - **70% FlashRank/Cross-Encoder score**: Deep semantic relevance
  - **30% Keyword matching score**: Lexical overlap and pattern matching
  - Combined score = `0.7 * rerank_score + 0.3 * keyword_score`
- **Why Hybrid Approach**:
  - Cross-encoder alone misses exact keyword matches
  - Keyword matching captures specific terms and numbers
  - Combination improves precision by 15-20% over single method
- Returns top-K most relevant chunks with confidence scores

**Justification for 3-Stage Design**:
- Stage 1 (FAISS): Fast retrieval, ~82% recall with 6x prefetch
- Stage 2 (Keywords): Noise reduction, removes ~40% irrelevant chunks
- Stage 3 (Hybrid): Precision boost to ~91% with combined signals
- Total pipeline: ~89% precision@5 (vs. 75% with FAISS alone)

---

### 4. LLM Integration

**LLM Choice**: "mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2" - subjected to 4-bit quantization
- **Why Mistral**:
  - Instruction-tuned open-source model (no API restrictions)
  - 7B parameters: fast inference on standard hardware
  - Strong performance on factual QA tasks
  - Better context adherence than Llama 2 of similar size
  - Supports temperature control for deterministic responses
  - why 4-bit ??    
    - 4-bit: ~3.5 GB VRAM (fits on most GPUs)
    - 8-bit: ~7 GB VRAM (needs RTX 3060+ or better)
    - FP16: ~14 GB VRAM (needs RTX 3090/4090 or A100)

**Custom Prompting Strategy**:

1. **System Prompt**:
   - Establishes role as financial analyst
   - Defines strict adherence to provided context
   - Sets rules for source citations
   - Specifies out-of-scope handling

2. **Context Formatting**:
   ```
   [Source 1: Apple 10-K, Page 282]
   <retrieved text>
   
   [Source 2: Apple 10-K, Page 394]
   <retrieved text>
   ```
   - Clear source attribution for each chunk
   - Helps LLM trace information back to sources
   - Enables accurate citation generation

3. **Generation Parameters**:
   - Temperature: 0.3 (low, for factuality)
   - Top-p: 0.9 (nucleus sampling for diversity)
   - Top-k: 40 (reduce low-probability token noise)

---

### 5. Out-of-Scope Handling

**Scope Boundaries**:
Questions answered:
- Financial metrics from Apple and Tesla 10-K filings
- Corporate structure, risk factors, executive compensation
- Business operations and vehicle models
- Filed dates and corporate filings info

**Out-of-Scope Categories**:
1. **Future Predictions**: "What is Tesla's stock price forecast for 2025?"
   - Response: "This question cannot be answered based on the provided documents."
   
2. **Information Not in 10-K**: "What color is Tesla's headquarters?"
   - Response: "This question cannot be answered based on the provided documents."
   
3. **Current Personnel Updates**: "Who is the CFO of Apple as of 2025?"
   - Response: "This question cannot be answered based on the provided documents."
   - (Documents are from 2023-2024; future 2025 info not available)

**Detection Logic**:
- Keyword-based filtering (stock forecast, weather, painting)
- Temporal mismatch detection (2025 questions on 2024 documents)
- System prompt fallback for ambiguous cases

---

## Performance Metrics

| Component | Metric | Baseline | Enhanced | Improvement |
|-----------|--------|----------|----------|-------------|
| Chunk Size | Characters | 1000 | 700 | Better coherence |
| Chunk Overlap | Ratio | 5% (50/1000) | 21% (150/700) | More context |
| Prefetch Multiplier | Factor | 3x | 6x | +Higher recall |
| Embedding Generation | Speed | ~1000 vec/sec | ~1000 vec/sec | Same |
| FAISS Search | Time | <50ms (30 items) | <50ms (60 items) | Same |
| Keyword Filtering | Time | N/A | ~50ms | New stage |
| Re-ranking | Time | ~200ms (30 items) | ~300ms (60 items) | +100ms |
| LLM Response | Time | ~2-5 sec | ~2-5 sec | Same |
| **Total Latency** | **Per Query** | **~2-3 sec** | **~2.5-6 sec** | **+0.5-3 sec** |
| **Relevance (P@5)** | **Precision** | **~75%** | **~89%** | **+14%** |

---

## Key Enhancements Summary

### What Was Added:

1. **SEC Item Extraction** (`ingestion.py`):
   - Regex pattern matching for SEC filing structure
   - Automatic metadata enrichment with item numbers/titles
   - Better document organization and retrieval

2. **Advanced Reranker** (`advanced_reranker.py`):
   - Stopword filtering with 300+ protected financial terms
   - Financial pattern extraction (currency, %, years, quarters)
   - Keyword-based chunk filtering before reranking
   - Hybrid scoring (70% semantic + 30% keyword)

3. **Hierarchical Chunk IDs**:
   - Format: `document|page|chunk_sequence`
   - Enables precise traceability and citations
   - Supports efficient filtering and aggregation

4. **Optimized Parameters**:
   - Chunk size: 1000 → 700 chars (better granularity)
   - Overlap: 50 → 150 chars (more context preservation)
   - Prefetch: 3x → 6x multiplier (higher recall)

5. **Testing Infrastructure** (`test_improvements.py`):
   - Validation suite for all improvements
   - PDF file processing with command-line interface
   - Query testing with custom documents
   - Comprehensive output and metrics

---

## Quality Assurance

1. **Source Accuracy**: Cross-reference retrieved chunks with original PDF
2. **Citation Correctness**: Manual verification of page numbers in answers
3. **Out-of-Scope Precision**: Test on ambiguous and out-of-scope queries
4. **Factual Consistency**: Compare model outputs against ground-truth answers

---

## Deployment Considerations

1. **Cloud Compatibility**:
   - FAISS index stored as `.faiss` file (~500MB for ~10K documents)
   - Chunks metadata in `chunks.json` (~100MB)
   - All dependencies available on Kaggle/Colab

2. **Scalability**:
   - Current design supports 1M documents with FAISS
   - Can upgrade to Approximate NN search if needed
   - Multi-document retrieval already implemented

3. **Model Requirements**:
  - utilised Hugging Face Mistral model (does not require token)
   - Alternative: Hugging Face Inference API for cloud deployment

---

## Future Improvements

1. ~~**Hybrid Search**: Combine keyword + semantic search~~ ✓ Implemented
2. ~~**Advanced Chunking**: Optimize chunk size and overlap~~ ✓ Implemented  
3. **Query Expansion**: Auto-generate related questions for better retrieval
4. **Fact Verification**: LLM-based verification against retrieved text
5. **Multi-hop Reasoning**: Chain questions for complex financial analysis
6. **Fine-tuning**: Domain-specific LLM fine-tuning on SEC filings
7. **BM25 Integration**: Add sparse retrieval alongside dense vectors
8. **Adaptive Reranking**: Dynamic weight adjustment based on query type

---

## References

- Sentence-Transformers: https://www.sbert.net/
- FAISS: https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss
- Cross-Encoders: https://www.sbert.net/docs/pretrained_cross-encoders.html
- Mistral 7B: https://mistral.ai/
